
@subsection Export game in Jellyfish .gam
@cindex Jellyfish
@cindex .gam
@cindex gam

You can export the current game in the Jellyfish .gam format. This is
useful if you wish import a specific game into Jellyfish. Other
programs may read the file as well, since the format is identical to
the Jellyfish .mat format.

@quotation
@cartouche
@kindex export game gam
@strong{export game gam @var{filename}}:
Export the current game in Jellyfish .gam format to @var{filename}.
@end cartouche
@end quotation

@subsection Export positions, games, matches and sessions in HTML
@cindex HTML
@cindex .html

@gnubg{} can export the current position, game, match or session
in HTML if
you wish to publish it on the web. A
@uref{http://home.online.no/~oeysteij/wc2002/final.html,sample match}
with the World Cup Final 2002 from Monte Carlo is available for
viewing (FIXME: put a match on gnu.org or gnubg.org instead).

@gnubg{} exports in validating 
@uref{http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/,XHTML 1.0} 
with the use of 
@uref{http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-CSS1,CSS}
style sheets. You may add your own style sheet to the exported HTML
files if you wish to override the default layout, e.g., change colors
or fonts. 

The board is made up from hundreds of pictures. Currently, you can
choose between three different sets of pictures: (a) the BBS images used
by Kit Woolsey's 
@uref{http://www.GammOnLine.com,GammOnLine} e-magazine,
@uref{http://www.dbgf.dk/,Danish Backgammon Federation's} web-based
discussion group and others, 
(b) the fibs2html images used by the Joseph Heled's
program @uref{http://fibs2html.sourceforge.net/,fibs2html}, and (c)
images generated by @gnubg{} itself. The images generated by @gnubg{}
will have the same design as your current design, and honours your
settings on clockwise or anti-clockwise movement and board numbering (on,
off, dynamic).

If you export a match or session to HTML @gnubg{} will write the
individual games to separate files. For example, if you export to file
@file{foo.html} the first game is exported to @file{foo.html}, the
second game to @file{foo_002.html}, the third game to
@file{foo_003.html} and so forth. 

The output from the HTML export can be customised. For example, it's
possible to leave out the 
analysis or parts of the analysis. Also, you may enter a specific URL
to the pictures used to compose the board which is useful for posting
positions on web-based discussion groups such as Kit Woolsey's
@uref{http://www.GammOnLine.com,GammOnLine},
the
@uref{http://www.dbgf.dk/,Danish Backgammon Federation's} 
@uref{http://www.dbgf.dk/Debat/,Debat Forum}, or you may opt to use a
default set of images available from the @gnubg{} web site at
@uref{http://www.gnubg.org/html-images/,FIXME Add images to www.gnubg.org!}.

@xref{Export}, for full details regarding the options available for
HTML export.

@subsubsection Description of the CSS stylesheet

As mentioned above @gnubg{} writes a CSS stylesheet along with the
generated XHTML file. The CSS stylesheet may be written verbatim in the
header section of the XHTML file, to an external file named
@file{gnubg.css}, or inside the tags using the
@file{style} attribute. If you wish to make any modifications to the
stylesheet without modifying the actual source code of @gnubg{} you
have to choose one of the first two methods. Note that the special
export for Kit Woolsey's 
@uref{http://www.GammOnLine.com,GammOnLine} uses the third method
since the XHTML is pasted into a web page without the possibility to
modify the header section of the page where the style sheet is
defined. Thus, it's not possible to modify the style of the generated
XHTML for GammOnLine without modifications of the source code or
extensive @emph{search and replace} in the geneated XHTML.

Below follows a description of the CSS classes used in the XHTML
export:

@multitable @columnfractions 0.3 0.6
@item Class 
@tab Description
@item .movetable
@tab Style applied to the entire table used for the move analysis
@item .moveheader
@tab The header of the move analysis table
@item .movenumber
@tab The rank number of a move in the move analysis
@item .moveply
@tab The column indicating the number of plies or rollout
@item .movemove
@tab The formatted move, e.g., 13/7 8/7.
@item .moveequity
@tab The column with the equity or MWC.
@item .movethemove
@tab Special style for row that contains the actual move chosen by the player
@item .moveodd
@tab Special style for the odd rows. Can be used to give an
alternating color for the rows.
@item .percent
@tab Style for the game winning probabilities and equities in the move
analysis. 
@item .blunder
@tab Emphasize blunders, e.g., ``Alert: missed double'' or ``Alert:
bad move''.
@item .joker
@tab Emphasize very good or bad rolls, e.g., ``Alert: unlucky roll''.
@item .stattable
@tab The style applied to the entire table with game, match, and
session statistics
@item .stattableheader
@tab The header row of the statistics table
@item .result
@tab Style for the text indicating the outcome of the game or match,
e.g., ``Joern Thyssen wins 16 points''.
@item .tiny
@tab Currently unsued.
@item .cubedecision
@tab The style applied to the entire cube decision table
@item .cubedecisionheader
@tab Style for the header row of the cube decision table
@item .cubeequity
@tab Style for any equity or MWC in the cube decision table
@item .cubeaction
@tab Style for the text indicating the correct cube action
@item .cubeply
@tab Style for the text that states the level of evaluation
@item .cubeprobs
@tab Style for the game winning probabilities in the cube decision
table
@item .comment
@tab The style applied to the entire table used for annotations or
comments, e.g., the kibitzing from imported SGG files
@item .commentheader
@tab The style applied to the header row of the annotations' table
@item .number
@tab Currently unsued
@item .fontfamily
@tab Style applied to the entire body of the XHTML document.
@item .block
@tab Style applied to the images in the export to avoid gaps between
individual pictures both horisontally and vertically.
@item .positionid
@tab Style for the Position ID and match ID.
@end multitable


@quotation
@cartouche
@kindex export position html
@kindex export game html
@kindex export match html
@kindex export session html
@strong{export position html @var{filename}}:
Export the current position in HTML to @var{filename}.

@strong{export game html @var{filename}}: 
Export the current game in HTML to @var{filename}.

@strong{export match html @var{filename}}: 
Export the current match in HTML to @var{filename}.

@strong{export session html @var{filename}}: 
Export the current session in HTML to @var{filename}.
@end cartouche
@end quotation

@subsection Export games, matches, and sessions in LaTeX
@cindex LaTeX
writeme

@subsection Export match or session in Jellyfish .mat
@cindex Jellyfish
@cindex .mat

You can export an entire match or session into Jellyfish .mat
format. This is very useful if you want to import a match or session
into other programs as most other backgammon programs are
able to read it. 

@quotation
@cartouche
@kindex export match mat
@strong{export match mat @var{filename}}: export the match in
Jellyfish .mat format to @var{filename}.
@end cartouche
@end quotation

@subsection Export games, matches, and sessions in PDF
@cindex PDF
writeme

@subsection Export games, matches, and sessions in PostScript
@cindex PostScript
writeme

@subsection Export position in Jellyfish .pos
@cindex Jellyfish 
@cindex .pos
writeme

@subsection Export position in Snowie .txt position format
@cindex Snowie
@cindex Snowie .txt position format
writeme

@subsection Export positions, games, matches, and sessions in plain text
@cindex text
@cindex plain text
		  
