@macro gnubg
@t{gnubg}
@end macro

@node top
@chapter Frequently Asked Questions
@cindex frequently asked questions
@cindex FAQ

This chapter documents the most frequently asked questions. Sources include
the newsgroup @uref{news:rec.games.backgammon,, rec.games.backgammon}, the
@uref{mailto:bug-gnubg@@gnu.org,, @gnubg{}-mailinglist} and the
@uref{http://www.gammonline.com,, discussion board of @emph{GammOnLine}}.

@menu
* General questions::
* Installation questions::
* Gnubg startup questions::
* Backgammon playing questions::
* Settings questions::
* Analysis questions::
* Database questions::
* Abbreviations::
* Some Backgammon and technical terms::
* Pay attention for posting to the mailing list::
@end menu

@node General questions
@section General questions

@menu
* What is GNU Backgammon?::
* Which operating systems are supported?::
* Where can I download it?::
* Do I have to pay for GNU Backgammon?::
* This GNU stuff sounds interesting::
* Learn more about backgammon::
* What is Hypergammon?::
* What is Nackgammon?::
* Where do I get more documentation about GNU Backgammon?::
* I have read all the documentation but I still have questions::
* I probably found a bug. What shall I do now?::
* I have some suggestions and new ideas for improvements::
* This F.A.Q. is full of typos and in bad English.::
@end menu


@node What is GNU Backgammon?    
@subsection What is GNU Backgammon?

GNU Backgammon (@gnubg{}) is software for playing and analysing backgammon
positions, games and matches. It's based on a neural network. Although it
already plays at a very high level, it's still work in progress. You may
play GNU Backgammon using the command line or a graphical interface
(based on GTK+).

@node Which operating systems are supported?
@subsection Which operating systems are supported?

Currently GNU Backgammon is specifically designed for @emph{GNU/Linux}. It
also compiles and (hopefully) runs under @emph{*BSD, IRIX, Solaris} and
@emph{True64 Unix}. Last but not least there are downloads available for
@emph{MS Windows}, @emph{MS DOS} and @emph{MacOSX}. If you successfully port 
GNU Backgammon to another operating system please let us know, contact 
@uref{bug-gnubg@@gnu.org}.

@node Where can I download it?
@subsection Where can I download it?

The official website is
@uref{http://www.gnubg.org/}. You can get daily snapshots at 
@uref{ftp://alpha.gnu.org/gnu/gnubg/snapshots/}. @emph{MS
Windows} binaries are available at @uref{http://home.online.no/%7Eoeysteij/}. 
Daily @emph{MS Windows} builds are downloadable from Nardy's homepage at
@uref{http://users.skynet.be/bk228456/GNUBgW.htm}
@emph{GNU/Linux}-Rpm's are available at 
@uref{http://www,acepoint.de/}. And a download for @emph{MacOSX}
can be found at @uref{http://mapage.noos.fr/gnubgosx/}.


@node Do I have to pay for GNU Backgammon?
@subsection Do I have to pay for GNU Backgammon?

GNU Backgammon is free software and belongs to the @emph{GNU Project}. For 
more information see the @uref{http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html,, GNU
General Public License}. But be aware that GNU Backgammon is not
@emph{public domain software} or @emph{shareware} as used in 
@emph{MS Windows}.

@node This GNU stuff sounds interesting
@subsection This GNU stuff sounds interesting

The best starting point is @uref{http://www.gnu.org,, GNU's homepage}.

@node Learn more about backgammon
@subsection Learn more about backgammon

@uref{http://www.bkgm.com,, Backgammon Galore} is a site that lives up
to its name. And an extensive collection of links is maintained at
@uref{http://www.chicagopoint.com/links.html,, Chicago Point links}.

@node What is Hypergammon?
@subsection What is Hypergammon?
Hypergammon is a variety of backgammon with only three checkers for 
each player. Both players start with their checkers on the 22-/23- and 24-point. 
Rules a like the original backgammon rules. Winning/Loosing a gammon or 
backgammon is also possible.


@node What is Nackgammon?
@subsection What is Nackgammon?
Nackgammon is a variety of backgammon with exactly the same rules. The
only difference is the starting position. Both players take a checker
from their 6- and 13-point and put them back on the 23-point.

@node Where do I get more documentation about GNU Backgammon?
@subsection Where do I get more documentation about GNU Backgammon?

Albert Silver has written a wonderful tutorial for playing GNU Backgammon
on @emph{MS Windows}. See @uref{http://www.bkgm.com/gnu/AllAboutGNU-1.0/AllAboutGNU.html} 
for more details.

@node I have read all the documentation but I still have questions
@subsection I have read all the documentation but I still have questions

Make sure you've read our small @ref{Pay attention for posting to the mailing list} 
info about how to post on the mailing list of GNU Backgammon. 
Send emails to the @uref{mailto:bug-gnubg@@gnu.org,,
@gnubg{}-mailinglist}. If you've found a bug, please be sure to include 
details of your operating system, the version of @gnubg{} you're using and 
any error messages. Try to describe exactly what is happening before the
error occurs.

@node I probably found a bug. What shall I do now?
@subsection I probably found a bug. What shall I do now?
Either send an e-mail to the @uref{mailto:bug-gnubg@@gnu.org,, @gnubg{}-mailinglist}, 
or use the menu @option{Help/Report bug} to fill out an online bug report. Please make
sure that the bug you found was not reported and/or fixed before.


@node I have some suggestions and new ideas for improvements
@subsection I have some suggestions and new ideas for improvements

Wonderful! Send e-mails to the 
@uref{mailto:bug-gnubg@@gnu.org,, @gnubg{}-mailinglist}.

@node This F.A.Q. is full of typos and in bad English.
@subsection This F.A.Q. is full of typos and in bad English.

Probably you are right. But you are cordially invited to send
corrections to @email{info@@gnubg.org}. And keep the following
quote in mind ;-):

@cite{Documentation is like sex: when it is good, it is very, very good,
and when it is bad, it is better than nothing.}
		    


@node Installation questions
@section Installation questions

@menu
* Where do I find a version for my operating system?::
* Do I need additional software to run GNU Backgammon?::
* Installing newer versions::
* Compiling it from the source code::
* What software do I need for compiling under @emph{GNU/Linux}?::
* What software do I need for compiling under @emph{MS Windows}?::
* It does not compile::
@end menu

@node Where do I find a version for my operating system?
@subsection Where do I find a version for my operating system?

@emph{MS Windows} binaries are available at 
@uref{http://home.online.no/%7Eoeysteij/}. Nardy Pillard has published 
an excellent page at @uref{http://users.skynet.be/bk228456/GNUBgW.htm,, Windows build}.
@emph{GNU/Linux}-Rpm's are available at 
@uref{http://mole.dnsalias.org/~acepoint/} or @uref{http://www.acepoint.de}. 
And a download for @emph{MacOSX} can be found at @uref{http://mapage.noos.fr/gnubgosx/}.

@node Do I need additional software to run GNU Backgammon?
@subsection Do I need additional software to run GNU Backgammon?

No, everything is included in the binaries.

@node Installing newer versions
@subsection  Installing newer versions

If you are using a @emph{MS Windows} operating system make a copy of
either @file{.gnubgrc} or @file{.gnubgautorc} and
@file{.gnubgmenurc}. You will find them in either @file{c:} or the home
directory of your GNU Backgammon (for instance: @file{c:\program
files\gnubg\}). After you have installed the new version, copy them
back.

If you are working with @emph{GNU/Linux} these files are
probably in your home directory (@file{~/}). They won't be overwritten
by installing a new version of GNU Backgammon, but it's always a good
idea to keep backup files. 

@node Compiling it from the source code
@subsection Compiling it from the source code

@ifnottex
Good luck to you! Download the source code and read either: @ref{What 
software do I need for compiling under @emph{GNU/Linux}?}, @ref{What 
software do I need for compiling under @emph{MS Windows}?}.
@end ifnottex

@iftex
Good luck to you! Download the source code and read either: What software 
do I need for compiling under @emph{GNU/Linux}, What software do I need for 
compiling under @emph{MS Windows}.
@end iftex

@node What software do I need for compiling under @emph{GNU/Linux}?
@subsection What software do I need for compiling under @emph{GNU/Linux}?

Depending on the distribution you are working with:

@itemize
@item @uref{ftp://alpha.gnu.org/gnu/gnubg/snapshots/,, GNU Backgammon
snapshots}
@item a @emph{"C-"}compiler
@item autoconf and automake
@item xdevel (for the graphical interface)
@item gtk+ >= 1.2 (for the graphical interface)
@item gtk+-devel
@item gtkglarea (optional for the 3d-board)
@item gtkglext (optional for the 3d-board)
@item ftgl (optional for the 3d-board)
@item python (optional for the python shell)
@item guile (optional, for invoking your own macros)
@item guile-devel
@item gdbm (optional, for using your own databases)
@item gdbm-devel
@end itemize

Unpack the GNU Backgammon snapshots and follow the instructions given in 
the @file{INSTALL} file.

@node What software do I need for compiling under @emph{MS Windows}?
@subsection  What software do I need for compiling under @emph{MS Windows}?

Nardy Pillards has published an excellent instruction guide for making a
@uref{http://users.skynet.be/bk228456/GNUBgW.htm,, Windows build}.

@node It does not compile
@subsection It does not compile

@ifnottex
Check that you've installed all necessary development packages. All you 
need should be listed in either

@emph{GNU/Linux}:@ref{What software do I need for compiling under
@emph{GNU/Linux}?}

or 

@emph{MS Windows}:@ref{What software do I need for compiling under
@emph{MS Windows}?}
@end ifnottex

@iftex
Check that you have installed all necessary development packages. All you 
need should be listed in either

@emph{GNU/Linux}: What software do I need for compiling under
@emph{GNU/Linux}?

or 

@emph{MS Windows}: What software do I need for compiling under
@emph{MS Windows}?
@end iftex

Look for warnings or errors during compiling. If you still don't have a
clue, contact the @uref{mailto:bug-gnubg@@gnu.org,,
@gnubg{}-mailinglist}.

@node Gnubg startup questions
@section Gnubg startup questions

@menu
* I get an error message at the start::
* GNU Backgammon complains about missing files::
* Starting from the @emph{WinXP} menu it plays like a beginner::
* My screen mixes up while starting GNU Backgammon::
* How do I make GNU Backgammon remember the size and place of the windows?::
* I only get a command-line interface -- where is the nice board?::
* When I restart GNU Backgammon all my settings are lost::
* I do not need all the graphics -- where is the command terminal?::
@end menu

@node I get an error message at the start
@subsection I get an error message at the start

Your computer is trying to tell you something, give it a chance and read the 
messages. Then read the next items carefully @enddots{} 

@node GNU Backgammon complains about missing files
@subsection  GNU Backgammon complains about missing files

GNU Backgammon is probably missing either the file @file{gnubg.weights}
or @file{gnubg.bd}. @file{Gnubg.bd} is the bearoff database used to 
evaluate endgame positions.

The file @file{gnubg.weights} contains the trained neural net weights
for most of @gnubg{}'s position evaluators.  Like @file{gnubg.bd}, it should
be kept in either the current directory or the installed directory.

@node Starting from the @emph{WinXP} menu it plays like a beginner
@subsection Starting from the @emph{WinXP} menu it plays like a beginner

Open the @emph{MS Windows} menu and go to the entry of
@gnubg{}, then right-click with the mouse and choose
@option{properties}. Check if the @option{working path} is the same
directory as the @file{*.exe}-file one line above. If not, adjust the
working path.


@node My screen mixes up while starting GNU Backgammon
@subsection My screen mixes up while starting GNU Backgammon

Install the newest driver for your graphic card. Be sure that you have
chosen a desktop resolution of  at least 65535 (16 bit colour depth). If
your card is an @emph{ATI Rage "something"} there might be some problems 
with the graphical interface (GTK+) and @emph{MS Windows}.

@node How do I make GNU Backgammon remember the size and place of the windows?
@subsection How do I make GNU Backgammon remember the size and place of the windows?

@node I only get a command-line interface -- where is the nice board?
@subsection I only get a command-line interface -- where is the nice board?

@emph{MS Windows} users should click on the correct menu entry (@option{GNU
Backgammon for windows}). If this doesn't work, check whether you have the 
file @file{c:\[path-to-your-gnubg]\gnubg.exe}.

@emph{GNU/Linux} users should check if @uref{http://www.gtk.org/,, GTK+} is
installed. 

@node When I restart GNU Backgammon all my settings are lost
@subsection When I restart GNU Backgammon all my settings are lost

Did you previously save your settings (menu @option{Settings, Save settings})?
If you have just installed a newer version of GNU Backgammon go to @ref{Installing
newer versions}

@node I do not need all the graphics -- where is the command terminal?
@subsection I do not need all the graphics -- where is the command terminal?

For @emph{GNU/Linux} users: open a terminal and start @gnubg{} with the
option @file{-t}.

@emph{MS Windows} users: Look for @file{gnubg-no-gui.exe}
in @gnubg{}'s directory or open the @emph{MS Windows} menu
@option{execute} and type @file{c:\[path-to-your-gnubg]\gnubg-no-gui.exe}.
There is also the menu entry @option{GNU Backgammon Command Line Interface}.

@node Backgammon playing questions
@section Backgammon playing questions

@menu
* What is the difference between starting a new game or match or session?::
* How do I move the checkers?::
* Can I place more than 5 checkers on a point?::
* GNU Backgammon is a poor player::
* GNU Backgammon plays too strong for me::
* I think this bot is cheating by rolling better dice::
@end menu

@node What is the difference between starting a new game or match or session?
@subsection What is the difference between starting a new game or match or session?

When you start a new match you will be asked to play to a certain 
match length (for example, 7 points). The player who first reaches
this score wins the match. The default for match play has the Crawford 
Rule (see @uref{http://www.bkgm.com/glossary.html#crawford_rule,, 
Backgammon Galore: Crawford rule}).

Starting a new session means playing an unlimited number of games. You may 
stop the session at any time and save it. The default for sessions has 
the Jacoby rule (see 
@uref{http://www.bkgm.com/glossary.html#jacoby_rule,, Backgammon Galore: 
Jacoby rule}).

If you choose to play a new game, GNU Backgammon will open the last
saved match or session you were previously playing. When there isn't a saved 
match or session it will start a new unlimited session.


@node How do I move the checkers?
@subsection  How do I move the checkers?

The easiest way to move checkers is to @emph{"drag and drop"}. Put your
mouse over the checker you wish to move, press and hold the left mouse button
and drag the checker to the desired point.

If you simply click then the left mouse button moves a checker the amount 
shown on the left die, and the right mouse button moves a checker the amount 
shown on the right die.

To always display the higher number on the left go to the menu
@option{Settings, Appearance, General} and activate @option{Show higher
die on left}.

@node Can I place more than 5 checkers on a point?
@subsection  Can I place more than 5 checkers on a point?

Standard international backgammon tournament rules allow up to all 15 checkers 
on a single point. If you wish to play with a maximum of 5 checkers, go to 
the menu @option{Settings} and activate the @option{Egyptian Rule}.

@node GNU Backgammon is a poor player
@subsection  GNU Backgammon is a poor player

Are you sure? If you are then you should @emph{definitely} enter the 
@uref{http://www.backgammon-tournaments.com/,, Backgammon World Championship} 
in Monte Carlo!

Otherwise check whether the file @file{gnubg.weights} is correctly
installed, also see @ref{GNU Backgammon complains about missing files}.

@node GNU Backgammon plays too strong for me
@subsection GNU Backgammon plays too strong for me

Go to the menu @option{Settings, Players} and change the values of
@option{Player 0}. There are also some predefined settings you may
choose from.

@node I think this bot is cheating by rolling better dice
@subsection I think this bot is cheating by rolling better dice

In the menu @option{Settings} you may choose between different random dice
generators. If you still think GNU Backgammon is cheating, program your
own dice generator or roll manually.

@node Settings questions
@section Settings questions

@menu 
* Where can I change the name of the human player?::
* Where are the player records saved?::
* Where are all the settings stored?::
* How do I change the colours?::
* How do I stop the annoying beeps?::
* What are "plies"?::
* What is "noise?"::
* What is "reduced evaluation"?::
* Where do I get the images for exporting positons and matches?::
@end menu

@node Where can I change the name of the human player?
@subsection Where can I change the name of the human player?

Go to the menu @option{Settings, Players ...} and click on @option{Player
1}. At the top there is a field where you can change the human player's name.

@node Where are the player records saved?
@subsection Where are the player records saved?
The player records are stored in a file called @file{gnubgpr}. On @emph{linux systems}
this file will be saved in ~/.gnubg/. On @emph{MS Windows} you can find this file in
the directory of gnubg, i.e. C:\Program Files\Gnubg\. It's alway a good idea to make
a periodically backup of this file and of @file{.gnubgautorc}.

@node Where are all the settings stored?
@subsection Where are all the settings stored?
The settings are stored in a file called @file{.gnubgautorc}. On linux this file is
in your home directory, on @emph{MS Windows} in the same directory as the program
itself.

@node How do I change the colours?
@subsection How do I change the colours?
Go to the menu @option{Settings, Appearance}. Here you may change the colours
of checkers, points and the board itself.

@node How do I stop the annoying beeps?
@subsection How do I stop the annoying beeps?

Go to the menu @option{Settings, Appearance} and click on the card
@option{General} at the right. Disable the option @option{Beep on illegal input}.

@node What are "plies"?
@subsection What are "plies"? 

A @emph{ply} describes how far GNU Backgammon evaluates the position. 
@emph{"0-ply"} means GNU Backgammon estimates the worth of the
position as it is. A @emph{"1-ply"} evaluation looks one step deeper. 
GNU Backgammon also evaluates positions that may occur one roll
further. @emph{"2-ply"} is another roll further and so on.

The more plies you choose the stronger GNU Backgammon becomes. But
keep in mind that it will also decrease its playing speed.

Note that @emph{"0-ply"} in GNU Backgammon is equivalent to the
@emph{"1-ply"} evaluation of Snowie. 

@node What is "noise?"
@subsection What is "noise?"

Noise is a way of reducing GNU Backgammon's @ref{What are
"plies"?,, 0-ply} evaluation. Increasing the noise decreases its playing
strength.

@node What is "reduced evaluation"?
@subsection What is "reduced evaluation"?

It's a method for cutting down the searching for candidate moves to increase 
speed. Reduced evaluations only work with 2-ply and deeper. 

@node Where do I get the images for exporting positons and matches?
@subsection Where do I get the images for exporting positions and matches?

You may use different images to export positions, sessions or matches into html.
@emph{GNU Backgammon} creates its own set of images when you go to the menue
@option{file/export/HTML images ...} and select a path. If you want to use BBS- or
fibs2html-images, download them from Nardy's page at 
@uref{http://users.skynet.be/bk228456/GNUBgW.htm}. 

If you want to export @uref{http://www.gammonline.com,, GammOnline} positions you 
can do this by using @option{Edit/Copy as/GammOnline (HTML)}. Note that you have to
download the images from @uref{http://www.gammonline.com/members/imgcopy.htm}. You have
to be a member for accessing these images.


@node Analysis questions
@section Analysis questions

@menu
* What is a position ID and match ID?::
* How do I manually create a position?::
* How can I remove checkers from the bar?::
* Which formats can I use to import positions?::
* Which formats can I use to import matches?::
* How can I switch the players sides?::
* What do "!" and "?" mean?::
* How is the error rate determined?::
@end menu

@node What is a position ID and match ID?
@subsection What is a position ID and match ID?

You will find two small fields titled @option{Position} and @option{Match
ID} at the top left of the GNU Backgammon window. Here you may use the
@option{position_id}- or @option{match_id}-format for setting up or
copying positions.

An explanation of both formats will (hopefully soon) follow in GNU 
Backgammon's documentation.

@node How do I manually create a position?
@subsection How do I manually create a position?

Open a new game, match or session. If @gnubg{} has already rolled the dice,
don't bother. Press @option{edit} and either type the @ref{What is a 
position ID and match ID?,, position_id} and press @kbd{Enter}
on your keyboard. Or use the mouse to arrange the checkers.

Clicking the mouse on the border of the board removes all checkers. A 
mouse click on a point then adds a certain number of checkers depending on 
exactly where you click. For example, to add 5 men on your 6 point, 
click at the top of your 6 point and it will fill with 5 men. The right mouse
button will add the men for your opponent's side. To add more than 5 checkers 
to a point you need to further click on the bottom edge of the fifth checker.
Click on the the doubling cube to set its position and value.

Then go to the menu @option{Game, Set turn} and choose the player on
roll, the dice will then disappear.

@node How can I remove checkers from the bar?
@subsection How can I remove checkers from the bar?

You can remove a chequer from the bar in edit mode by drag and drop
while holding down the [ctrl] key.


@node Which formats can I use to import positions?
@subsection Which formats can I use to import positions?

Currently only @file{*.pos} from @uref{http://jelly.effect.no/,,
Jellyfish} are supported.

@node Which formats can I use to import matches?
@subsection Which formats can I use to import matches?

You may import @file{*.mat} from @uref{http://jelly.effect.no/,,
Jellyfish}, @file{*.ssg} from @uref{http://www.gamesgrid.com/,,
Gamesgrid} or the @emph{oldmove} format used on
@uref{http://www.fibs.com,, FIBS}. Also possible now is the @file{*.tmg}
format of @uref{http://www.truemoneygames.com,, truemoneygames}.

@node How can I switch the players sides?
@subsection How can I switch the players sides?

Go to the menu @option{Game} and select @option{Swap players}.

@node What do "!" and "?" mean?
@subsection What do "!" and "?" mean?

After analysing a game or match GNU Backgammon lists some comments on 
checker plays and cube decisions. Open the menu @option{Windows,
Game record} and you will see a list of moves. If any moves or cube
decisions differ from the best, GNU Backgammon will place a comment next
to it.

The default settings are:

@multitable @columnfractions .40 .30 .25 
@item +0.040 (very good): @tab  @emph{Not yet in use}
@item +0.020 (good):      @tab  @emph{Not yet in use}
@item -0.040 (doubtful):  @tab  @emph{?!}
@item -0.080 (bad):       @tab  @emph{?}
@item -0.160 (very bad):  @tab  @emph{??}
@end multitable

You may change these comments in the menu @option{Windows, Annotation}, 
creating other comments for moves and/or cube decisions.

@node How is the error rate determined?
@subsection How is the error rate determined?

GNU Backgammon determines the players strength as follows: If a player
has an average error (per move) of:

@multitable @columnfractions .40 .30 .25 
@item Less than 0.005 ---> @tab @emph{Extra-terrestrial}
@item Less than 0.010 ---> @tab @emph{World class}
@item Less than 0.015 ---> @tab @emph{Expert}
@item Less than 0.020 ---> @tab @emph{Advanced}
@item Less than 0.025 ---> @tab @emph{Intermediate}
@item Less than 0.030 ---> @tab @emph{Novice}
@item More than 0.030 ---> @tab @emph{Beginner}
@end multitable

After analysing a game, match or session you can see a summary in the
menu @option{Analyse, @dots{} statistics}. Note that you cannot change the
ranges of these values.

@node Database questions
@section Database questions

@menu
* Which databases are available for GNU Backgammon?::
* How do I get these databases?::
* How do I create the bearoff databases?::
* How do I create the necessary databases for playing Hypergammon?::
@end menu

@node Which databases are available for GNU Backgammon?
@subsection Which databases are available for GNU Backgammon?
Depending on the release and your settings there are different databases
available:

@multitable @columnfractions .40 .30 .25
@item gnubg_os0.bd ---> @tab One sided bearoff database
@item gnubg_ts0.bd ---> @tab Two sided bearoff database
@item hyper1.bd    ---> @tab Database for Hypergammon with one chequers
@item hyper2.bd    ---> @tab Database for Hypergammon with two chequers
@item hyper3.bd    ---> @tab Database for Hypergammon with three chequers
@end multitable

The default @file{gnubg_os0.bd} one sided bearoff database contains
the approximative probabilites for bearing off a maximum of 15 chequers on 6 points
in "n" rolls. The default @file{gnubg_ts0.bd} contains the exact probabilities for 
a maximum of 6 chequers on 6 points for both sides. For a detailed desciption go to
Nardy's excellent page at @uref{http://users.skynet.be/bk228456/Bearoff-databases.html}

The @emph{Hypergammon} databases are for playing hypergammon. You have to create them
for your own. See @ref{How do I create the necessary databases for playing Hypergammon?}.


@node How do I get these databases?
@subsection How do I get these databases?

Actually the default databases (see above) should be included. For @emph{Linux systems}
you can also get them at @uref{http://www.acepoint.de/GnuBG/rpm.html}. The windows databases
can be found here: @uref{http://users.skynet.be/bk228456/dlls_recent_builds.htm}

@node How do I create the bearoff databases?
@subsection How do I create the bearoff databases?

Depending on your operating system it's either:

@command{makebearoff -o [P] -f [gnubg_os0.bd]} for @emph{linux} with "P"= Number of points
@command{makebearoff.exe -o [P] -f [gnubg_os0.bd]} for @emph{MS Windows}

or

@command{makebearoff -t [P]x[C] -f [gnubg_ts0.bd]} for @emph{linux} 
with "P"= Number of points and "C"=Number of chequers
@command{makebearoff.exe -o [P]x[C] -f [gnubg_ts0.bd]} for @emph{MS Windows}.

Again a detailed description can be found at @uref{http://users.skynet.be/bk228456/Bearoff-databases.html}.


@node How do I create the necessary databases for playing Hypergammon?
@subsection How do I create the necessary databases for playing Hypergammon?

On @emph{linux} it's

@command{makehyper -f hyper1.bd -c 1}
@command{makehyper -f hyper2.bd -c 2}
@command{makehyper -f hyper3.bd -c 3}

On @emph{MS Windows} it's

@command{makehyper.exe -f hyper1.bd -c 1}
@command{makehyper.exe -f hyper2.bd -c 2}
@command{makehyper.exe -f hyper3.bd -c 3}

Note that the 3-chequer database will need approximately 400 MB of RAM.




@node Abbreviations
@section Abbreviations

@menu
* "gwc"?::
* "mwc"?::
* "dp"?::
* "tg"?::
* "epc?"::
@end menu

@node "gwc"?
@subsection "gwc"?

"gwc" is an abbreviation for @emph{game winning chances}. 

@node "mwc"?
@subsection "mwc"?

"mwc" is an abbreviation for @emph{match winning chances}.

@node "dp"?
@subsection "dp"?

In the menu @option{Analyse, Game/Match/Session statistics} you will see
a window with some statistics. Near the bottom are four lines beginning with 
@option{Missed @dots{} and Wrong @dots{}}.  "dp" means "doubling
point" and describes a situation in the game where you probably should've
doubled your opponent.

@node "tg"?
@subsection "tg"?

"tg" is an abbreviation for "too good". It indicates that you probably should have 
kept the cube and not doubled (because of high gammon chances). 

@node "epc?"
@subsection "epc?"

"Epc" is the abbreviation for "effective pip count". See @ref{Some Backgammon and technical
terms} for a detailed description.


@node Some Backgammon and technical terms
@section Some Backgammon and technical terms

@menu
* Effective Pipcount::
* Kleinman Count::
* Thorp Count::
* Jacoby Rule::
* Crawford Rule::
* Beaver::
* Raccoon::
* Probability::
* Equity::
* Standard Deviation::
* Confidence Intervall::
* Joint Standard Deviation::
* Market Window::
* Gammon Value::
@end menu

@node Effective Pipcount
@subsection Effective Pipcount

The @emph{effective pipcount} (epc) is the result of average rolls you need 
to bearoff a chequer in a one chequer race  muliplied with the average roll (8.167). 
The @emph{wastage} is calculated as the result of epc - pipcount.

An example:

@example
Player A: 5 chequers on his 1-point, 4 chequers on his 2-point
Pipcount: 5x1 + 4x2 = 13
Epc:      2.189 (Average rolls) x 8.167 = 17.878
Wasted:   17.878 - 13 = 4.878
@end example

It's easy to see that your wastage arises the more chequers you have on lower points (i.e.
you roll a 6 to bear off a man from the 2- or 1-point.


@node Kleinman Count
@subsection Kleinman Count

The @emph{Kleinman Count} is another calculation in longer bearoff situations.
The formula is DxD/S, where "D" is trailers pipcount + 4 - leaders pipcount, and
"S" is the sum of leaders and trailers pipcount -4.

If the result of DxD/S is round about 1.2, then the leader has a double and the
trailer a close take. Get more informations about the @emph{Kleinman Count} at
@uref{http://www.bkgm.com/rgb/rgb.cgi?menu+cubehandlinginraces}


@node Thorp Count
@subsection Thorp Count

@emph{Thorp Count} is a mathematical method to calculate cube decisions in tricky 
bearoffs:

@enumerate
@item Count the leaders (L) and the trailers (T) pipcount.
@item Add an extra point for every checker on the acepoint (L1) and (T1).
@item Deduct an extra point for every possessed home board point (L2) and (T2).
@item Add two extra points for every remaining checker (L3) and (T3).
@item If the resulting leaders count (L3) equals 30 or is greater than 30 add 10% ((L4).
@end enumerate

@itemize @bullet
@item If (L4) - 2 equals (T3) it is an initial double and a take.
@item If (L4) - 1 equals (T3) it is a redouble and a take.
@item If (L4) + 2 is less than (T3) it is a pass.
@end itemize

Get more informations about @emph{Thorp Count} at 
@uref{http://www.bkgm.com/rgb/rgb.cgi?menu+cubehandlinginraces}

@node Jacoby Rule
@subsection Jacoby Rule

The @emph{Jacoby rule} is used in backgamon sessions or moneygame. This rule implies,
that a player can't win an undoubled gammon (meaning: when the cube is still in the middle).
This rule was established to protect players from "boring" games while watching his opponent
trying to win a gammon and getting doubled out if this doesn't succeed. For more information 
see @uref{http://www.bkgm.com/glossary.htm,, Backgammon Galore}.
    

@node Crawford Rule
@subsection Crawford Rule

The @emph{Crawford rule} is only used in match play. It implies, that a player cannot
double in the first game after his opponent has reached a score needing only 1
point to win the match. See also @uref{http://www.bkgm.com/glossary.htm,, 
Backgammon Galore}.


@node Beaver
@subsection Beaver
A @emph{beaver} is only allowed in session games (also known as @emph{money 
games}). To @emph{beaver} means redoubling (and keeping the cube) rather than 
just accepting when your opponent has doubled (see
@uref{http://www.bkgm.com/glossary.html,, Backgammon Galore: 
beavers}.

@node Raccoon
@subsection Raccoon

When you doubled your opponent, and he makes use of the @emph{beaver} you are allowed
to turn around the cube again. This is called a @emph{raccoon}.


@node Probability
@subsection Probability

The @emph{probability} describes the likelihood of an event's outcome. If you, i.e., flip
a coin the probability getting "head" will be 50% or 0.5 [going from 0-1]. Getting a certain
number on a die with numbers from one to six is 1/6 or 0.166 or 16%. 

An example in backgammon:

Assume that you have one chequer on your 2-point and one on your 5-point. Your opponent has two
chequers on his acepoint, but fortunately you are on roll. What is your probability to win?

@example
19 rolls (66, 65, 64, 63, 62, 55, 54, 53, 52, 44, 33, 22) 
will take both chequers off, 17 rolls will not.
@end example

Your probability is 

@example
19/36 = 52,8% or 0.528
@end example

to win the bearoff.

@node Equity
@subsection Equity

@emph{Equity} in backgammon is the number of points you expect to win in a certain position.

Take the same example from above. Your equity will be:

@example
(19x1 (w) + 0x2 (g) + 0x3 (bg) - 17x1 (l) - 0x2 (lg) - 0x3 (lbg))/36 
= 2/36 = 1/18 = 0.056.
@end example

Every time you play this position for a dollar you are expected to win 5.6 Cent. If you play
this position a hundred times your gain will be (theoretical) 5.6 dollar.


@node Standard Deviation
@subsection Standard Deviation

This is more difficult and best explained by an example. Let's assume you roll a die 10 times.
The result is

@example
3,6,6,1,2,5,4,6,5,2
@end example

Add up all numbers and divide them by 10 (the number of rolls).
You'll then get an arithmetic mean of 

@example
40/10 = 4
@end example

Of course this differs from the expected value of 

@example
3.5 = (1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6)/6
@end example

The variance of our example is calculated as:

@example
( (3-4)^2 + (6-4)^2 + (6-4)^2 + (1-4)^2 + (2-4)^2 + 
+ (5-4)^2 + (4-4)^2 + (6-4)^2 + (5-4)^2 + (2-4)^2 )/10

= (1 + 4 + 4 + 9  + 4 + 1 + 0 + 4 + 1 + 4)/10 = 3.2 
@end example

and is a measure for how far single events differ from the arithmetic mean. The standard deviation is the
square root of the variance, here it is 

@example
3.2^1/2 = 1.79 
@end example

Transferred to our backgammon example from above let's assume you don't know anything about
the calculated probability we have done before (or imagine a position that can't be exactly
calculated). You play this position with a friend a hundred times, you win 58 games and loose 
42 games. This will give you an equity of

@example
(58-42)/100 = 0.16
@end example

But how sure can you be that 0.16 is the "true" equity of this position? Perhaps you will loose 6 points
in another session of 100 games. Let's calculate the standard deviation of our result.

@example

@end example


@node Confidence Intervall
@subsection Confidence Intervall




@node Joint Standard Deviation
@subsection Joint Standard Deviation




@node Market Window
@subsection Market Window

A @emph{market window} is the range between the point of "first double" and
"last take". In moneygames it's usually between 50% - 75% winning chances 
depending on the value of the cube. In matches this range may extremely differ.


@node Gammon Value
@subsection Gammon Value 
In money games the @emph{gammon value} is usually 0.5. This means that you have
to win twice as much gammons than loosing games to justify a certain move 
compared to another candidat. In matches this may also extremely differ depending
on the match score. 


@node Pay attention for posting to the mailing list
@section Pay attention for posting to the mailing list

@menu
* Subscription::
* Subject::
* Formatting::
* Signature::
* Quoting::
* Attachments::
* Bug reports::
@end menu


@node Subscription
@subsection Subscription

You may always subscribe to our mailing list or change your subscribtion options at
@uref{http://mail.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/bug-gnubg}. This is also the place
for unsubscribing.


@node Subject
@subsection Subject

Please use a meaningfull subject. There is no use in " bug found", 
"gnubg", "help" or "Please help" as subject. If you really want to 
be smart put a 

@itemize
@item bug: 
@item feature request:
@item position:
@item documentation:
@item compiling error:
@end itemize

or any other meaningfull category in front of your own subject.

For example:
@example
  | Subject: bug: gnubg crashes when loading Snowie .mat file
@end example

@node Formatting
@subsection Formatting

Please don't use html e-mails. A few e-mail programs like @emph{Outlook Express} 
send html per default. It is easy to change this in the option
menue. Further information can be found at
@uref{http://www.amsat.org/amsat/listserv/express.html}.

@node Signature
@subsection Signature

Your signature should be not bigger than four (4) lines and start with a
"-- " (Yes, this are two hyphens (minus signs) followed by a space)

Do *not* include graphics, logos, pictures or other strange images as
part of your signature.

If you qoute text of another posting, it's _not_ necessary to quote his
signature also.


@node Quoting
@subsection Quoting

The object of quoting is to make it possible for a reader to see an
exchange of e-mails as though they were listening to a conversation. The
reader should normally not need to go back and read a previous e-mail to
see what point you are replying to, nor should they need to scroll
backwards and forwards in your e-mail to find the different parties to a
conversation. 

Ideally when responding to someone else's e-mail, you should quote only
enough of that person's e-mail to let the reader know *what* the other
person wrote that you are responding to. Remove any other text that
isn't relevant to your reply. Some topics can develop into threads of 10
or more e-mails and no-one wants to read the same irrelevant portions 10
times while following the thread.

If you are responding to more than one topic in someone else's e-mail,
then quote each of those topics separately and put your responses
immediately below the associated topic. 

Please avoid top quouting and full qouting. What do we mean? A few @emph{MS Windows} 
e-mail programs (like @emph{Outlook Express}) always quote the original
e-mail in full at the bottom of the reply and put your cursor at the top
when you begin composing a reply. The result is referred to as top
quoting - all the responses come at the top and the reader has to scroll
down to see what it is you are replying to. Failure to remove those
portions of the original e-mail to which you are not replying is
referred to as full quoting. In the worst case, a lengthy exchange of
e-mails could end up with 10 or 15 copies of the original e-mail. Top
quoting and full quoting are some of the most annoying behaviours in
mailing lists. 

With "good" quoting you will greatly enhance the readability of this
list and our liability to help. Here is an example of qouting how it 
should be:

@example
  | Adam  wrote:@*
  |@* 
  | > Here is a bunch of text by someone. This was originally a 25 line@*
  | > paragraph, but [snip irrelevant portion]@*
  |@*
  | Now you, as the author, respond to those points, right here.@*
  | If you have more to quote, do so:@*
  |@*
  | > Someone still had a couple more points to which you wanted to@*
  | > reply, so you quote them [but still snip unneded stuff]@*
  |@*
  | and respond to it.@*
  |@*
  | Your sig then typically follows (but DON'T quote Someone's sig,@*
  | unless that is what you are responding to... and if so, you'd better@*
  | make sure that it is relevant to a Lawhead mailing list, or that it@*
  | is a miniscule fraction of your otherwise completely on-topic post.)@*
@end example

When you answer to a posting, please use _always_ the "reply" or "reply@*
to list" button. This will keep a thread readable like@*

@example
  | ---- original posting A
  | --------|-- direct answer to A (B)
  | ---------------|-- direct answer to B (C)
  | ----------------------|-- direct answer to C
  | --------|-- direct answer to A (D)
  | ---------------|---direct answer to D
@end example

Also write new posts instead of replying to very old posts and change
the subject. This will ensure correct threading.


@node Attachments
@subsection Attachments

No. Don't send attached files to this mailing list if they are bigger
than appr. 10 kb. Exception: You are asked to do so (mostly in a direct
e-mail, very seldom to this mailing list. I.e. it may happen that
someone asks you to send one of your match files.

If you have access to a webpage, put your file on it and send us the
url.


@node Bug reports
@subsection Bug reports

Much as the devopers would like to see nothing but praise and
astonishment from the users, bugs do occur and they form one of the main
purposes of this list. A good bug report makes it much easier for a
developer to find and (one hopes) fix a problem. What's needed:

@itemize @bullet
@item Operating system you run
@item Version of GNU Backgammon
@item A short description of the bug
@item The occurance (reproducable, sometimes, seldom, once)
@end itemize

You may also use @uref{http://savannah.gnu.org/bugs/?group=gnubg} for reporting
a bug. If you you are clever (and we know you are) you may search the
page mentioned above or the mailing list archive at
@uref{http://mail.gnu.org/archive/html/bug-gnubg/} if your bug already has been
reported and if there is already a solution or workaround.


  

