
@gnubg{} can import matches produced by various other programs or
online servers. For example, you can import matches played on 
@uref{http://www.gamesgrid.com/,GamesGrid} or 
@uref{http://www.fibs.com/,FIBS}. @gnubg can export positions,
matches, or money session to a number of formats; some suitable for
printing, some suitable for including in emails or Usenet postings,
and others suitable for publishing on the world wide web or for
posting to backgammon forums.

The following sections describe how to import and export positions,
matches, and sessions with @gnubg{}.

@subsection Jellyfish .pos
@cindex Jellyfish
@cindex .pos
@cindex pos

@gnubg{} can import positions in 
@uref{http://jelly.effect.no/,Jellyfish}
.pos format. To import a position
file using the GUI select a file from @code{File->Import->.pos
position}. 

The .pos position format is documented at
@uref{http://jelly.effect.no/fspec.htm,The Jellyfish Position File
Format}. 

@subsection Jellyfish .mat
@cindex Jellyfish
@cindex .mat
@cindex mat
@cindex BBGT

@gnubg{} can also import matches and money sessions in the .mat
format. This format is often used to move games between different
programs, as most programs (e.g., Jellyfish, Snowie, BGBlitz, and
others) support import and export of this format.

To import a match or money session in the .mat format, select a file
from @code{File->Import->.mat match}.

Note that at least one program (BBGT) is known to write multiple matches in
the same .mat file. In this case @gnubg{} will only read the first
match. If you wish to import all matches from such a .mat file, you'll
manually have to split the file into files containing the individual
matches. 

@subsection GamesGrid .sgg
@cindex GamesGrid
@cindex sgg
@cindex .sgg

@gnubg{} can import matches and money sessions played on GamesGrid if
saved in the SGG format. Currently, @gnubg{} doesn't support import of
the native undocumented .cbg format. Also note
that @gnubg{} does not analyse table stakes, so imported money
sessions will be analysed as a normal money session.

To import an SGG file using the GUI select a file using the menu entry
@code{File->Import->.sgg match}. 

@subsection FIBS oldmoves
@cindex FIBS
@cindex oldmoves

@gnubg{} can import matches and money sessions from FIBS
in the oldmoves format. Most of the GUIs for playing on FIBS supports
saving of matches either in the oldmoves format or in Jellyfish .mat
format.

To import an oldmoves file using the GUI select a file using the menu
entry @code{File->Import->FIBS oldmoves}.

Note that @gnubg{} will only read the first match in the file. If you
wish to import all matches from a file containing more than more game,
you'll manually have to split it.

@subsection TrueMoneyGames .tmg
@cindex TrueMoneyGames
@cindex .tmg
@cindex tmg

@gnubg{} can also import matches and money sessions played on
TrueMoneyGames saved in the TMG format (file suffix .tmg). Please note
that @gnubg{} does not analyse table stakes, so imported money
sessions will be analysed as a normal money session.

To import an TMG file using the GUI select a file using the menu entry
@code{File->Import->TrueMoneyGames .tmg match}. 

@subsection Hans Berliner BKG format
@cindex Hans Berliner
@cindex .bkg
@cindex bkg

Matches written in the Hans Berliner BKG format can be imported into
@gnubg{}. To import an BKG file using the GUI select a file using the
menu entry @code{File->Import->BKG session}.


@subsection Snowie .txt position format
@cindex Snowie
@cindex Snowie .txt position format

@gnubg{} can import positions written in the Snowie .txt position
format. Please note that very important distinction between
@emph{Snowie .txt position} and @emph{Snowie Standard Text}. The
former is used for position and the latter is an extension of the
Jellyfish .mat format, and can be imported in @gnubg{} using the .mat
importer. 

@gnubg{} can also export positions to Snowie .txt format for easy
exchange of positions with Snowie users.

To import an Snowie .txt position file using the GUI select a file
using the menu entry @code{File->Import->Snowie .txt position file}.


@subsection Batch import
@cindex import, batch

@gnubg{} doesn't support batch import and analysis using the GUI, but
batch import is possible with the command line version of @gnubg{}.

Under Unix execute:

@code{gnubg -t < @var{input-file} > @var{output-file}}

Under Windows it depends on how your version of gnubg was build. For
example, if you use the build by Oystein Johansen you should execute

@code{gnubg-no-gui.exe < @var{input-file} > @var{output-file}}

The @var{input-file} must be carefully prepared. For example, it
could look like:

@example
import sgg file1.sgg
analyse match
save match file1.sgf
import sgg file2.sgg
analyse match
save match file1.sgf
import mat file3.mat
analyse match
save match file3.sgf
@end example

If you wish to adjust your setting for the analysis you can include
commands like:

@example
set analysis chequerplay evaluation plies 2
set analysis cubedecision evaluation plies 3
[...]
@end example

See the command reference for further details regarding the commands
available in @gnubg{}.


@subsection Other formats
@cindex MSN Gaming Zone
@cindex .cbg
@cindex cbg
@cindex FIBS/W
@cindex MacFIBS


There are a number of utilities written that can read and write
positions, matches, and money sessions in other formats than the ones
@gnubg{} has direct support for.

@uref{http://www.wingflyer.com/zoneutilities/,Bunny's Zone Converter}
can be used to convert matches saved on MSN Gaming Zone to Jellyfish
.mat format which can be imported into @gnubg{}. 

The neural net backgammon program 
@uref{http://www.bgblitz.com/,BGBlitz} can read Gamesgrid .cbg, FIBS/W
logfiles, MacFIBS logfiles and other formats which can be written back
in the .mat format for importing into @gnubg{}.

@subsection Tips and tricks

@kindex swap players
@cindex swap players
If you want to exchange the playes, i.e., @gnubg{} has imported you as
the top player rather than the bottom player, select them menu entry
@code{Game->Swap Players}.

