@c{written by Achim Mueller <ace@gnubg.org>}

@menu
* Installing a MS Windows binary::
* Installing a Linux rpm-package::
* Installing a FreeBSD package or port::
* Compiling and installing the source::
@end menu

@node Installing a MS Windows binary
@section Installing a MS Windows binary

For an installation of GNU Backgammon on MS Windows operating systems
you need at least this build from @uref{http://www.gnubg.org/downloads/windows/,, gnubg}.
You'll find a file @file{setup.exe}, which is approximately 11 mb. If you want 
daily builds, go to Nardy Pillards page at @uref{http://users.skynet.be/bk228456/GNUBgW.htm}
and read his documentation carefully. If you download everything, you'll have these
packages:

@itemize @bullet
@item setup.exe (Oysteins installation archiv from 20030727, including everything you need)
@item gnubg-old-[date]Zip.exe (Nardy's daily snapshot, no 3d-board, old layout)
@item gnubg-[date]Zip.exe (Nardy's daily snapshot, with 3d-baord and new layout)
@item board-3Dfiles.exe (Package needed for 3D-support)
@item locale_[lang].exe (Nardy's language packages)
@item gnubg_nogui-[date]Zip.exe (Nardy's daily snapshot without Graphical User Interface)
@item libpython22Zip.exe (Package needed for python support in the "no gui" version)
@end itemize

Nardy's builds include a daily snapshot of the @file{gnubg.exe} and some addons. If you like
daily builds, get either the "old layout", the "new layout" or the "no gui" binary (*.exe).
You may also download a language package for Windows. Be aware, that the translation is still
work in progress. Only the english and the german translation are (nearly) fully available.

@strong{Part I (Main program)}: After downloading the software "doubleclick" on @file{setup.exe}. You 
will be asked whether you want to install GNU Backgammon for windows. Click on @emph{yes}. In 
the following window accept the license agreement and click on @emph{next}. Then choose a 
directory where GNU Backgammon shall be installed. After this select the MS Windows menu 
entry and whether or not a desktop and a quick launch icon shall be created. 

The installation program will install all necessary files on your disk and finally ask you
whether GNU Backgammon shall be launched or not. Now you are ready to play.

@strong{Part II (Daily snapshots)}: If you like current snapshots, get the files from Nardy's
page at @uref{http://users.skynet.be/bk228456/GNUBgW.htm}. The files @file{gnubg-[date]Zip.exe}
or @file{gnubg-old-[date]Zip.exe} contain only the binary @file{gnubg.exe}.

If you like the new style with panels and a 3D-board layout get @file{gnubg-[date]Zip.exe} and the
additional package @file{board-3Dfiles.exe}. Doubleclick on the file, select your installation 
directory and click on @emph{extract}. Be catious: the binary will now overwrite the "old" @file{gnubg.exe}. 

For the old layout (seperate windows, no 3D-board) choose @file{gnubg-old-[date]Zip.exe}. 
You will now have a second program file in you GNU Backgammon directory called @file{gnubg-old.exe}.

@strong{Part III (Support for different languages}: If there is a package supporting your
native language, you may download this package also. Doubleclick on the @file{locale_[lang].exe},
and the installer will put all necessary files into your GNU Backgammon directory. After
copying the files a README file will open with instructions how to activate the language.

@strong{Part IV (Command Line Interface)}: For using the "non-gui" version of GNU Backgammon you
only have to additionally install @file{gnubg_nogui-[date]Zip.exe}. Again doubleclick on the
binary @file{gnubg_nogui-[date]Zip.exe}. Be aware that possible older version of 
@file{gnubg-no-gui.exe} will be overwritten. Accept the warning and click on @emph{ok}.
Choose the directory of your GNU Backgammon installation and click on @emph{extract}.

@strong{Part V (Additional python support)}: If you need additional support for the scripting
language python you also have to install the package @file{libpython22Zip.exe}.


@node Installing a Linux rpm-package
@section Installing a Linux rpm-package

Get the rpm packages from the Linux download section at 
@uref{http://www.gnubg.org,,GNU Backgammon webpage}.
You'll need the main package @file{gnubg-[version].rpm},
the databases @file{gnubg-databases.rpm} and the sound 
packages @file{gnubg-sound.rpm}. As root do a

@example
#: rpm -ihv gnubg*.rpm
@end example

If you want to update GNU Backgammon you will mostly need
only the new main package. Then you can update @gnubg{} with

@example
#: rpm -Uhv gnubg-[version].rpm
@end example

Some people like to compile GNU Backgammon from the source-rpms.
In this case you have to download the package @file{gnubg-[version].src.rpm}.
As root do a

@example
#: rpm --rebuild gnubg-[version].src.rpm
@end example

For people who want to verify the packages we put a public key on
@uref{www.acepoint.de/pubkey_ace.asc,, public key ace}. Download the
key and import it with

@example
#: gpg --import pubkey_ace.asc 
#: rpm --verify [package] (for rpm version 3)

or

#: rpm --import pubkey_ace.asc
#: rpm --checksig [package] (for rpm version 4)
@end example


@node Installing a FreeBSD package or port
@section Installing a FreeBSD package or port
fixme

@node Compiling and installing the source
@section Compiling and installing the source

Download the sources from @uref{http://www.acepoint.de/GnuBG/sources/, GNU Backgammon sources}.
We try to put daily snapshots there. Be aware, that these sources may not compile!

Unzip and untar the sources and change into the source directory:

@example
#: tar -xzvf gnubg-[version].tar.gz
#: cd gnubg-[version]
@end example

Copy at least the file @file{gnubg.weights} into the source directory. Then do a 

@example
#: aclocal -I m4
#: autoconf
#: automake --add-missing
#: ./configure
#: make
#: make install
@end example

The first three commands may not be necessary depending on your system. The command
@command{./configure} includes some options you may like to use. You can get all options
with

@example
#: ./configure --help
@end example



