\input texinfo
@setfilename event.info
@settitle libevent: A library for event handling
@include version.texi

@set month-year September, 1996

@ifinfo
This file documents the libevent library for event handling.

By Gary Wong, 1996.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@sp 10
@title The libevent library
@subtitle version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{month-year}
@author Gary Wong

@end titlepage

@ifinfo
@node Top
@top libevent library

This manual documents how to use the libevent library for asynchronous
event handling.  It corresponds to version @value{VERSION} (updated
in @value{month-year}).

@menu
* Introduction::
* Generators::
* Handlers::
* Timeouts::
* Concept Index::		  Index of concepts described in this manual.
* Function and Variable Index::	  Index of externally visible functions
				  and variables.
@end menu
@end ifinfo

@syncodeindex fn vr

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@cindex introduction

FIXME general introduction.

Every event has a generator and a handler.  Only the generator may
signal that the event has occurred, and only the handler can mark
handling as completed.

Each event is handled either synchronously or asynchronously (FIXME
the generator decides?) ---
when a generator signals a synchronous event, it is handled immediately
and the result from the handler is available on completion; but when
an asynchronous event is handled the generator retains control, and
the handler is invoked at some later stage.  The generator cannot
directly obtain the result of the handler in this case.

In general, an event handler cannot know in advance whether it can handle
a message immediately or not.

All events can have timeouts (which are normally set by the handler).  If it
has not occurred within the timeout period, the timeout handler is
called instead of the normal handler.

@node Generators
@chapter Generators
@cindex generator

Generator can:
 - signal event as occurred
 - close generation of further events

@node Handlers
@chapter Handlers
@cindex handler

Handler can:
 - mark handling as complete
 - set, clear or change timeout

@node Timeouts
@chapter Timeouts
@cindex timeout

Blah blah.

@node Concept Index
@appendix Concept Index
@printindex cp

@node Function and Variable Index
@appendix Function and Variable Index
@printindex vr

@contents
@bye
